and so when my first son was born
I had a call from an uncle and he said
to me hey congratulations I was still
the hospital and as a joke he said well
now you need to start thinking about
schools and so when my son was born and
I heard that question from my uncle I
thought I don't care what I have to do
if I have to move somewhere or start
something or what it may be I'm not
going to put my children into a system
that doesn't understand the gifts and
abilities I have just because they don't
fit on the conveyor belt
[Music]
hello everyone watching and listening
today I'm speaking with Zach Lane the
co-founder of Wonder a Socratic based
school system K-12 in Wichita Kansas
it's a follow-up to a discussion I had
with Jeff Sandifer who's a innovator on
the
um on the educational front for k212 and
I wanted to talk to Zach today about the
details of the educational process so
that parents and other people interested
in childhood education could understand
more thoroughly the mechanics of the of
the process first of all I have holes in
my memory you know because I was ill for
a while and I don't remember
how we met we met through Jeff eh
actually was the opposite oh okay it was
uh I was working in education
and uh became a listener to a lot of
what you were doing and uh a follower in
some ways and then you had explained how
you had so much interest in
revolutionizing education in various
different ways
and so with that I reached out to you I
sent a cold email to you and we met
Father's Day maybe 2018 in Minneapolis
and we sat down uh and we talked about
education and from there it sort of
spurred into this hey we're very aligned
we have uh similar interests and we're
wanting to see some more change and from
that uh then introduce you to Jeff and
we started kind of working with the
Acton MBA the acting academy
um and that's how it's that's how it all
started I see I see now so you're deeply
involved in educational transformation
yeah you have a school and you're going
to be taking over the actin program at
some point in the future well we're
taking a leadership role in the Acton
program yeah sure our school we have an
independent uh decentralized network is
what I would say of schools and our
school is called Wonder okay and who's
we
uh so I would say well my my wife and I
co-founded our school and so that's when
I say we that's usually who I'm talking
about well we found wonder and the
process for for me was uh Acton wasn't
actually the first place I looked uh
this whole thing started for me out of
necessity and the reason was when I was
a young kid
I didn't fit in the Box I had too much
energy I was probably too enterprising
my parents and principal didn't know
what to do with me I can remember a
parent-teacher conference when my
principal who was a teacher at the time
told my parents if I was ever stuck on a
desert island I'd want to be with Zach
because he'd find a way off but that
wasn't necessarily a good thing it's
sort of like how do we solve that
problem and so when my first son was
born
I had a call from an uncle and he said
to me hey congratulations I was still
the hospital and as a joke he said well
now you need to start thinking about
schools and I spent my entire life
trying to get out of school basically
just wanting to be done with education
get into the world get into business or
whatever it might be
and when he said that it was one of
those times that something strikes you
and that struck me and I hadn't thought
about it and so that kicked off what was
about a five or six year Journey which
was traveling the country visiting
schools I probably visit over 70 schools
around the country and in other
countries as well uh and one of those uh
was acting academy and so that's how I
got connected there and so what did you
see when you went and saw these schools
so mostly it was this
there was varying flavors or the attempt
to put a different uh maybe uh screen
over what was essentially the same model
almost all of them were the same direct
instruction model we see teacher at the
front of the classroom lecturing to
students students in desks all day and
Days Broken up by periods now some were
working more in
um vocational skills there are some that
were like helping young people you know
learn the trades and things like that
great others were quite Innovative
there's some we worked with a school on
the campus of MIT that was for middle
school high schoolers that was quite
Innovative they were very Hands-On very
project oriented very project driven but
what I noticed is that it was still
something that was ultimately led by
adults and so that seemed to be the
trend everywhere no matter how
Innovative the school was so the basic
model
that you perceived was teacher in the
front of the room rows of desks
regimented periods the children as
absorbing knowledge essentially
knowledge is something delivered as
factual you saw a lot of variations on
that but no fundamental transformation
oh yeah variations on that also
variations on socioeconomic status
within the school that was something
because when many people think about
school they think public and private
what they don't understand is 99 of
those schools operate the exact same way
just what you described one one teacher
at the front of the classroom and
students listening and trying to absorb
taking notes and not being necessarily
engaged in Hands-On learning or taking
ownership over their own life yeah well
it's an interesting model it's an
interesting epistemological model
because it presumes that
the most appropriate knowledge the most
necessary form of knowledge that
children will gain is factual and
descriptive right that it's semantic it
can be transmitted through words that
it's memorization predicated that it
comes from a central Authority
that the children should be socialized
to sit
immobile essentially and listen
passively rather than actively that they
should do that in a group that they
should be regiment regimented in time
right so you might say contrary to that
while children should be actively
engaged in exploring they should be
questioning they should be moving around
there's no necessary reason for that
regimentation they should be developing
their own Vision the the the Enterprises
could be project focused
um and that education should be much
more about the acquisition of skill
rather than the acquisition of
regurgitatable knowledge I mean that
that's a few Transformations that you
might consider and so okay but you you
you said that while you were
investigating all these schools you came
across the acting academy and what made
it stand out in your mind
well it's all the things that you just
mentioned are all what I would call
there's some about the the process that
you go through within the school and
much about the content that you're going
to absorb in the school or that you're
engaging with what I think that we need
to step back and look at is that
when we're talking about different
schools what we look at is not so much
the content the academic content like we
know largely what young people should be
engaged in as far as like the basics
like we know that what we talk about as
a system
and what I mean by this is let me give
you an anecdote
I've probably talked to over a thousand
parents at this point about our school
about what they want from education for
their child
and one question I always ask is what do
you dream your child will be able to do
when they're 18 or when they leave the
house
and without exception
I do not get an academic answer I do not
get I hope they can do complex math I
hope that they've mastered calculus I
hope that you know I don't get academic
answers what I get especially the
younger the child is is I hope they can
go out into the world with courage I
hope they can know how to be right well
yeah work well with other people touch
on in that list of Alternatives was
character development moral character
development and and and motivation right
and so all right so the parents have a
vision that's more aligned with that
they want their child to be of good
character to be able to go out into the
world forthrightly and so so what do you
make of that when when you hear parents
tell you that well what I make of it is
that almost all parents want that
however when you try to marry the idea
of the traditional school with what I
would say parents are actually asking
for is agency they want their child to
have agency over their life which is
having the power and resources to
fulfill their potential something like
that and so when I look at the judicial
model you look at it's predicated on
compliance yeah it's predicating control
permission to speak permission to move
about permission to work with others
well what I say is those two things
don't marry you can't you can't put your
child in a system like that and expect
that they will fulfill this potential of
agency
within that because those are some of
the most formidable years of your life
you think three to 12 especially from
the development of the brain like you're
learning what system you're within and
how to operate within that system and
Jordan it's actually quite a conundrum
for people especially with conservative
beliefs because we say hey this is what
we want we talk about it at home we talk
about agency and and freedom and
responsibility and yet we send our
children to a school that doesn't uh
advocate for any of those yeah well I
did some background research into the
origin of the
Public School System
partly because I developed these
programs the self-authoring programs and
one of them is an exercise that helps
people develop a vision for the future
and I implemented that with my
University students first and so it asks
them to
um imagine their lives five years down
the road
they could have if they could have what
they needed and wanted
assuming they were taking care of
themselves properly what might their
life look like they read about that for
15 minutes and then they write about the
hell they could produce around
themselves for in five years if they let
their bad habits take the upper hand and
then they go through seven major domains
of their life and write out a vision and
a strategy for that so it's intimate
relationship and family friendship
career
um
resistance to Temptations like alcohol
and drug abuse use of time outside of uh
outside of work let's say productive and
generous use of time outside of work and
uh care of themselves physically and
mentally we're going to add civic
responsibility to that list and so it's
an attempt to help people
derive create a differentiated vision of
what their life could be like and who
they could be
and also to conceptualize themselves as
the sort of person who can derive a
vision
and I use that in my classes for years
and I conducted three research studies
using that program and we showed that if
you had students
do that exercise for 90 minutes
in their orientation session before they
went to trade school they were 50
percent less likely to drop out which is
like absolutely staggering result and
their grade point averages of students
already enrolled went up 35 right which
is crazy right for 90 minutes but the
crazy thing really crazy thing was as
far as I was concerned and it took me
probably a year or two of thinking to
really notice this was that
well this isn't rocket surgery as a
ridiculous Canadian comedian would put
it right
of course people should have a vision
for their life you talked about
character development moral developments
like well that's what parents want for
their children we would like our
children we would like those we love to
be active engaged moral agents
um aiming upward and yet we do nothing
whatsoever in the school system to
Foster that ever even once even for one
day so my students having despite having
gone through 14 years of education and
being
top of the class all things considered
because the University of Toronto was a
fairly selective School
no one had ever asked them to do an
exercise like that and that the more I
thought about that the more I was
dumbfounded by it and then I did some
investigation into the derivation of the
American North American European for
that matters public education system and
found out that it was based on the
Prussian model and the prussians
produster
Universal education system in the late
1800s
because they were afraid they were
losing military superiority and they
wanted to produce a Cadre of mindless
obedient soldiers
that was expressly the purpose and then
that model was adopted by prototypical
fascists in the U.S again in the late
1800s this is before Mussolini and all
of that time
corporate types mostly who wanted to
produce cadres of obedient workers and
that's why the desks are in rows and
that's why there's Factory bells and
that's why it's top down leadership and
but what was really stunning about that
wasn't only that that was the model but
it's it's worse than that because the
people who built the schools were
consciously aiming at eradicating the
will of the students who were part of
the system because they wanted them to
be obedient now you know we did need
we
there was a demand for factory workers
at the time and there were a lot of
rural people flooding into the cities
and no one really knew what to do with
the kids because they didn't have farm
work and there was some need for an
education system and there was some
utility in producing people who knew how
to abide by a clock and who could their
foretake on factory jobs but that as a
model especially now in the modern world
where
things change so quickly that you can
hardly keep up and people have to be
dynamic and that sort of nine to five
lifetime factory work is
maybe well it's a dream of the past in
some ways even though it might not have
been that desirable to begin with it
certainly has nothing to do with the way
people live now but
well the education system hasn't changed
except perhaps for the worst in 150
years it's just it it's it it's
absolutely
jaw-dropping that the fact that this is
all the case okay so you saw in the
acting schools you saw a completely
different model and walk us through that
like I don't even understand what a
school day would look like in a
decentralized system I I went to London
I saw uh um Kate Burleson School the the
uh Michaela school and she she's taken
that teacher
dominant let's say teacher Authority
student listening model to its ultimate
degree I mean she's very very good at it
the teachers are handing out information
at a rate that's absolutely staggering
and the kids are awake and listening
although they're responding a lot they
they have an opportunity to talk to each
other that's structured and they do a
lot of responses to the teacher so
they're really engaged and I can see
that a model like that can work right
there may be a variety of models that
would work for kids but your model is
very different and so what what would it
what would a child experience what would
a classroom do you have classrooms what
would a classroom look like
um what would a typical classroom look
like what's the typical experience of a
child in a school like yours yeah so I
think you have to start with
understanding the role of the adult the
classroom and when you understand that
in today's age with what we have the
tools we have available to us and the
systems that we use we do not have a
need for an adult to be the transmitter
of content knowledge to a child in
elementary middle school high school
we've proven that we know that it's been
going on for over a decade so at our
school young people are broken up into
different ages it's not a monoculture
which that exists nowhere in nature you
don't ever see a buffalo only with like
one set of Ages roaming the planes so we
have varying Studios that somewhat line
up with what you say like lower
elementary Upper Elementary some of this
comes as well from an understanding of
what Maria Montessori has done and and
did and a lot of that has withstood the
test of time and really quickly to
digress for a second what you mentioned
about you know 1894 the the gang of nine
got together I think it was and decided
this is what people should learn physics
biology chemistry and this this is how
they should learn and that largely has
not changed at all but it's important to
know at that same time there was a
debate being being waged waged about how
young people should be educated some of
these models like Montessori even the
first idea of kindergarten things like
that those came out of those similar
times but this one took root and took
hold because it had maybe utility at the
moment in the moment but has stayed
largely unchanged and that's I I don't
think anybody could argue that's not to
the detriment of the of the generations
that have come before one of the things
I hear often is well I went to a school
like this and I turned out fine and I
and first of all no you probably didn't
yes and is it is it the the thing that
we're doing to say we want to
institutionalize the the limit of
potential of reaching potential it's not
did you do find us what could you have
done if people knew saw and understood
the gifts and abilities that you could
bring to the world so you are if you're
in our school you'll see an uh a school
that's not run by adults so how many
students about so we could have uh one
Studio say uh Elementary Studio that has
maybe 30 Learners and one adult and
that's a good thing the more adults that
get into the classroom we say the worse
the The Experience gets and that's for
kids how old that that ratio that that's
about six and a half to around 11. okay
so you have 30 kids from six and a half
to eleven in one room yep and there's
one adult in there yes okay what's the
adult doing so the adult is what we call
a Socratic facilitator so they're
operating in an inquiry-based fashion
primarily what they do is we launch
every day with a Socratic discussion and
that's where we put young people in the
shoes of a hero facing a tough decision
or dilemma and then we provide two uh
choices a b choices or maybe more that
are opposed very opposed to each other
but both could be seen as equally uh
equally acceptable answers and then that
facilitator their job is to allow the
young people to engage in a discussion
in a debate we do this for 15 minutes
every morning uh and that's how things
start that's how every day launches that
way it launches intentionally which is I
think something we can talk about too is
that a bell ringing to to start a day is
not an intentional launch right
attention first launch yes and so with
us what we do is we say hey we're here
maybe the Studio's facing something like
uh there's a lack of respect or
something like that or they're upcoming
to a a exhibition that we hold I'll talk
about those and it's like crunch time so
we'll put them in the shoes of a hero
usually a real hero from history that
faced a similar situation with high
stakes discuss and debate and then and
you there's two sides to the argument oh
yes there's always two sides to the
argument and all the kids from six and a
half to eleven participate absolutely
yeah you know in my in my graduate
seminar
what I used to do uh as I
learned how to run seminars
rather than lecturing because I like to
lecture and that worked well for me
I would assign a paper to students they
would read it in class because often
they wouldn't read it they'd say they
read it but they wouldn't have so they'd
read it in class and then we would
derive alternative
um
standpoints from the paper two opposing
viewpoints and I would assign a
Viewpoint to to group to one group of
four or another group of four it was
usually 16 kids in the class the other
two groups would evaluate and grade and
provide feedback and then we'd go around
the room and I assigned it arbitrarily
and the goal was to form a group of four
and to
lay out your argument and then to
conduct something approximating a debate
with the other team and it was really
useful for the students it was engaging
for them and they had a chance to lay
out their argument and to make it
publicly and to learn how to speak
publicly
but also to learn that because the sides
so to speak were assigned arbitrarily
they learned how to
understand that there was many things to
be said on multiple sides of an argument
right and then to really put that in
place and that was a very effective
model and so you're doing something like
that in the first 15 minutes first 15
minutes every day and these why why is
that the first thing the kids do well I
I think so well one it's an intentional
way to start the day but I think you
have to back up and understand that
you know something I like to say to
parents is that look young people are
embedded in a story and a narrative they
wake up every day in a story and so we
as as parents and I think as adults we
should just be very thankful we get to
be a part of this story it's so much fun
to be a part of the story and so when we
talk about entering into our school
there's this idea in game making about
the magic circle the magic circle is
essentially you enter a place and when
you enter that place the world change
it's that world and so our world at the
school we are heavily embedded in
stories and narratives the hero's
journey is something that like really is
is uh tagging and catalog the way we
operate the school that you're a young
person on a journey to find your calling
and change the world and that's a true
calling on your life and the world needs
something of you and so what we're doing
in these in these Socratic discussions
is really embedding them in story
because
you know can I digress here just for a
second hey digress away so we talk about
the idea of building uh character or our
moral education and I think that's
somewhat of a misnomer because number
one parents are the primary uh people
that should be helping to impart moral
education on children but and what role
does the school have so it's actually
very interesting if you look at the work
of Martin buber he was uh he he uh
talked about in his uh essay uh the
education of character he talked to this
idea how he would try to teach character
lessons in a classroom and he'd actually
say the opposite would have the effect
it would be that he would talk about how
you shouldn't lie and then you get an
essay from the a person in the class
that was the biggest person that would
tell not tell the truth about how you
shouldn't lie right right you talk about
how you shouldn't bully the week and you
get the strong ones snickering you say
how you can't teach ethics in an ethics
class yeah you teach ethics and morals
in in a number of ways experience
relation to others but also stories yeah
yeah and so embedding people young
people and stories from the start in the
start of the day to let them know you're
here on an important journey and there's
going to be a like uh a right and a
wrong in the way that that you operate
and it's not always that we're doing a
discussion like that but often it can be
how do we treat other people how do we
act with respect so and what do you see
when you watch the kids engage in this
debate you have kids from six and a half
you said to 11. so what would what would
an observer see if he or she was
watching this interaction oh this you
know actually I have a great story to
share a cure the dawn who we both know
he came and visited our school and his
son Hercules uh sat in on some Socratic
launches with us and I I brought Akira
came back to the office we did this big
um show with him with Learners and he
was a DJ a world-class example that we
brought in and he was so gracious to
come work with us
uh after he Akira wouldn't observed a
launch with his son in it and he came
back and I said hey what'd you think and
he said it brought a tear to my eye to
think that these young people can treat
each other with such respect and that
they can disagree so politely and that
they can have their views heard and
understood why don't the 11 year olds
dominate the six and a half year olds
often they they do in in the sense of
they discuss more they'll more they'll
verbalize more however if you have been
a six and a half year old that's been in
that position and you've grown up in the
system you understand that it's to your
advantage to help make sure the younger
ones have their voice heard as well and
so what you'll see if You observe a
Socratic discussion at wonder is one we
start off with a polarizing topic about
two different choices that is embedding
them in a story but we follow What's
called the rules of just conduct and
those rules just kind of how do we
operate in Socratic discussion so the
discussion leader might say hey which
rule just conduct do we want to focus on
today and it might be listening with our
whole body so it's like and then they'll
hold each other accountable throughout
the discussion to say hey remember we
promised Alyssa with our whole body and
what does that mean it means that
they're not turning around or they're
not you know uh they're paying attention
they're paying attention and how do they
call each other out on that without that
becoming bullying or dominating it's
see those are I think what you'll find
is those types of things are a product
of a different type of environment when
you're in an environment that's based on
Mutual accountability and based on
peer-to-peer learning and you're
building a tribe you see people within
the tribe as like not as an enemy or
somebody that's competing with you but
somebody that you're trying to help the
whole tribe move up and that's what we
do see now I tell parents all the time
hey when you have a child that's six and
a half or seven just entering into the
elementary environment
like and they're in a Socratic
discussion they're they're absorbers
they're observing and observing
information it's one of the best ways
they learn how to interact in one of
those discussions by watching a 10 year
old or 11 year old in those discussions
the leading cause for death among
infants in the U.S and the world is
abortion sadly with the abortion pill
accounting for over 50 percent of all
abortions babies lives are at an even
greater risk in the midst of this awful
tragedy we can do something about it
thanks to our new partners at preborn's
Network of clinics pre-born clinics
stand strong offering love support and
compassion to hurting women helping them
to make the right choice by letting a
woman see her baby with a free
ultrasound and hear the heartbeat a
baby's chance at life is doubled these
clinics provide mothers who choose life
with Maternity in baby clothes diapers
car seats counseling and much more all
of these services are provided free of
charge and up to two years of assistance
is granted so join us in the fight to
save these precious lives this year
Jordan Peterson's listeners have a goal
to save eleven thousand babies one
ultrasound is 28 and any donation amount
will help and is tax deductible to
donate dial pound 250 and say the key
word baby that's pound 250 baby or go to
freeborn.com Jordan that's preborn.com
Jordan we are the answer to save these
lives dial now
right right and that's that and that's
interesting too because
the 10 year old nine-year-old
ten-year-old 11 year old first six and a
half year old is someone who's close to
their proximal zone of development so my
kids tend to Hero worship kids who are
slightly older than them old enough so
that they can
appear as a model for their behavior
forward I mean kids in grade four really
admire kids in grade six they're a
little afraid of them they think are
quite they're Mighty beings
um that's the term Larry are and he's
the president of Hillsdale College used
which I think is quite funny but you
have them in your class and so and I
would imagine too that the 10 and 11
year olds also come to regard themselves
as role models for the younger kids
which is a really good responsibility to
put on them so but they're treating the
little the the little kids property
they're learning how to do that and
you're saying that they do that more or
less as a consequence of being embedded
in a culture that's promoting exactly
that kind of interaction oh absolutely
and and you mentioned that the older
ones see themselves as Role Models it's
not just that they see themselves
they're in positions elected by younger
ones to lead so we have each in our
elementary it's broken up into squads
and each squad has a squad leader so
each so the class is broken up into a
squad yes not not in the during the day
it's just you're you're a member of this
squad and so you might have a meeting on
a Monday and how many people would be in
a squad around six something like that
okay so you have your little Squad and
they have meetings and what do the
meetings consist of uh they talk about
wins and losses from the week before
what people are performance review yep
something like that what you hope that
you want to accomplish the next week
maybe are you stuck somewhere that your
squad leader can help you in that so you
really these these older Learners that
have earned it because remember they
have to get elected by the younger ones
elected meaning what that they're into a
group and they elect the leader of the
group and how does that work technically
what is an election technically in the
beginning of the year it looks like they
get together and they have a vote well
they write down who they want to lead
their squad and there's also a process
for impeachment of that squad leader if
they're not upholding the promises that
they've committed to for the group and
so the younger ones have a voice within
there and it also helps to keep tyranny
at Bay right so it's so okay so you've
got the the beginnings of a democratic
polity there how do the little kids know
who to vote for well that's a learning
process yeah because they get to know
the other the other kids absolutely and
sometimes it's following somebody that's
a little bit older but you're you are
correct in this
it's that they see somebody older than
but it's also that they see somebody
they can embody they yeah they're about
to be there I'm going to be that person
in that age group at some point pretty
soon and that's a really powerful thing
and is it a goal do you think it's
honest to say that it's a goal for the
little kids to well obviously they end
up as bigger kids but our are your
Schools running well enough so the
little kids actually would like to be
elected as a leader at some point that's
actually a vision rather than something
that teachers only dream the kids want
I I'll say yes but here's what I say
about that I think it also comes with
cognitive development as they move away
from social being the work that they do
because younger ones love to play and
they love to be in social groups with
other people school work is not that
important to them and if it's gamified
which we do they love doing it but as
they get older what happens is they see
their peers moving from one Studio to it
to the other and then they start to take
on work as their work so to speak like
they really want to like accomplish this
thing to reach this next level and then
yes it's a rite of passage they see that
we see this development happen you know
if you're six seven eight-year-old a lot
of your work is social and a lot of it
and that's what it should be rather than
just academic pushing pushing academic
work onto a young person and this kind
of goes back to the structure of how we
operate and I'll digress a little bit
here is
look part of what got me interested in
doing this in the first place was that I
didn't believe that young people should
be in a desk for seven hours a day I
didn't fit in that that at all and so
when my son was born and I heard that
question from my uncle I thought I don't
care what I have to do if I have to move
somewhere or start something or what it
may be I am not going to put my children
into a system that doesn't understand
the gifts and abilities I have just
because they don't fit on the conveyor
belt and so at our school when you look
at that young people have the freedom to
work with their peers they have the
freedom to choose the work that they'd
like to do also they have the freedom to
be distracted as long as they're not
distracting other other people they they
can exit the room for a while if they
need to be distracted
and I think there's this whole idea in
education in the elementary especially
of young people are so distractible well
it's like we're thinking that okay we
don't understand that the prefrontal
cortex as a protracted maturation it you
can't force development in that way
distractible if they're bored stiff yes
you know kids can concentrate on
something for a very long period of time
if they're interested in it absolutely
so the distractibility and this is the
case for human beings more generally is
if you see a pronounced Trend across a
number of people the first thing to
presume is there's something situational
driving it rather than something
temperamental yeah and so you might say
well little kids are distractible it's
well maybe it's because they're bored to
death in the conventional classroom and
I would say that's particularly true of
active boys Okay so we've talked a
little bit about squads and we've talked
a little bit about Studios you started
talking about what happens first thing
in the morning okay so the kids have a
discussion and they're trying to iron
out a complex moral conundrum and
they're doing that as a consequence of
Socratic dialogue and there's an
age-graded or an uh what there's a group
of kids that spans quite a quite an age
and the older kids how help lead the
younger kids and they take
responsibility for it and the little
kids have something to look forward to
as they grow up and so that's the first
15 minutes of class so what happens what
happens next let's continue walking
through the day we break the socratic
discussion and then though the schedule
is posted on the board so there's
different levels levels of control as we
say things that the guides have control
over and things the Learners have
control over so we put a schedule out
but we're not in charge of enforcing the
adherence to that schedule they mutually
enforce that so the next thing you'd
walk into is core skills on Mondays we
open the day with a meeting with them
with with the mentor so each young
person in elementary has a mentor from
the middle or high school that's been
elected based on kind of exempl
exemplifying some of the traits that it
means to be at wonder and so on Monday
they have a meeting with that mentor and
that Mentor is asking questions like hey
what what got you most excited last week
what were you really proud of
accomplishing what do you hope to
accomplish this week are there any
social dynamics or things like that
going on that like that I can we can
talk about things like that so they have
how old are the mentors they're uh gosh
from 12 to 16 right now so they're
pretty young old enough to do this but
pretty young and your experience is that
they do a credible job at that they do
an incredible job at that it's it and
it's that one they use a system so
they've gotten together as we've put
this this Mentor program together
they've gotten together to say what are
the questions we should ask like what
they've got together they've got
together figured this out they'll run
those things by us but unless we see
some glaring issue which we don't
because even if we saw an issue we'd
like them to test it and come to that
discrimination right right yeah yeah
then they'll meet with the mentor on
Monday and one on one one-on-one and
then they break after that mentor
meeting how long is the meeting it's
usually 10 to 15 minutes that's okay and
they do that once every week every week
and it's setting your eyes to the
Horizon what are you here to accomplish
what would you like to do this week and
I often tell parents that goal setting
is an interesting thing because at age
seven the proper time Horizon for a goal
is likely this afternoon yeah right what
am I yeah well that's a very that's
worth driving home is because the
younger the kid the shorter the future
time Horizon yes right right and then we
watch this move up when you're entering
middle school they can accurately plan
their entire year what do I want to
accomplish in Reading Writing math
quests things like that for the year and
it starts your kids can do that yes it
starts because we start instituting the
site idea of hey we're here to
accomplish something and what is that
thing we'd like to accomplish and the
mentors really I wonder how tight the
relationship is between prefrontal
cortical maturation and length of time
Horizon I bet it's pretty tight you know
while it's complex right to calculate
yourself across a expanding Horizon of
time and it means the replacement of
motivation based on basic motivational
States like hunger and thirst and
temperature regulation desire for play
all of that which are impulsive
motivations it's the replacement of that
with a higher order Vision where all
those competing
demands are integrated right integrated
across time that parallels the movement
from say subcortical dominance to
cortical dominance something like that
so you guys are facilitating that okay
so they meet with their mentors and well
now we're now we're an hour into the day
what happens next maybe 30 minutes from
today but maybe 30 minutes yes so next
they go into their core skills work and
this core skills work is we use adaptive
platforms like for math you could use
Khan Academy Beast Academy something
like that uh we're reading it's based
Academy it's a similar program to Khan
Academy it just functions who set that
up you know I'm not sure who set up
Beast Academy but in the the point there
is that some Learners like using con
other Learners like using Beast okay and
they're adaptive what does that mean it
means that as you get into them like so
the they can see where are you
struggling yeah what areas you're
struggling with and they'll serve you
more of those types of problems and also
like with Khan Academy and I say this to
parents often
I don't know that there's anybody that's
had a larger impact on math in the world
than South College yeah right yeah I'll
walk through that a little bit well just
I think there's 50 million active users
maybe that's an old statistic
um but he's essentially built a platform
to allow for the complete self-direction
of of uh of math learning yeah that's
such a good deal it's unbelievable yeah
and and each problem that you get
there's a video related to how to solve
it with salcon talking about how to work
through a problem like yes yeah and I
tell people well
you can pause that person and you can
rewind that person right I mean the
dynamic is so much different than a than
a traditional classroom in that way and
one thing I hear from people is that
a lot of elite private schools are
actually assigning Khan Academy as
homework and I say well it's only a
matter of time before we see the actual
redundancy there right it's like no
kidding and so
um so yeah so you might do Khan Academy
or beast there's reflex math and there's
different math programs yeah we have it
that when you're doing a unit test for
instance a check proficiency yeah
whatever platform you do your practice
on you you check out on con and so
there's oh there's a way to make that as
your standardized indicator correct yeah
and so how do how do you think your
students are doing on the mathematical
front I guess you know this yes how how
are they doing on the mathematical front
well I say overall they're doing quite
well now it's varying right because at
the younger ages we don't operate
anything that would equate to a
kindergarten college preparatory
environment yeah I have a I say our
goals for our elementary Studio are very
simple and they're two things love
learning and learn to get along with
other people Master those love coming to
school every day and learn how to work
well in a tight-knit tribe with other
people and so the reason we say that is
if you took the whole Corpus of
elementary school work of what needs to
be accomplished it's actually not that
much work relatively speaking if you're
at the right developmental age so you
can spend time learning how learning the
important work of how do I get into a
flow or how do I find something I love
how do I remove distractions things like
that you can spend that time we have
systems help with this and still be
fully on track so to speak with doing
with doing uh core skills work so
do you have any idea how your students
at any given age are performing let's
say in the mathematical realm because
that's quite easy to quantify compared
to students in a typical in a typical
Public School environment yeah well
here's what I say we don't talk about
this much just because you know I wonder
we do one standardized test a year and
it usually starts around age nine
something like that and we give no
administrative support for it we don't
tell anybody it's happening I show up
one day yeah doing a test yeah for our
data that we see for the elementary age
it's around two and a half cradles above
where they should be okay are your kids
selected on the basis of income or IQ
neither we do have tuition however we we
really try to when it comes to selection
it's much more for the younger ages
based on do the parents understand what
type of school we are are they wanting
to go on a journey that has triumphs and
hardships do they really understand what
they're getting into do you think that
you have reasonable coverage across the
socioeconomic Spectrum or you tilted
more towards middle class and upward
well I would say that I I think any like
school that charges tuition is likely
tilted a bit more towards middle class
yeah however we have people that are you
know social workers journeyman
Carpenters many many uh families in the
school would fall you know working class
yes and it's a stretch to pay tuition
but they see the value in what it is and
they they say they understand that one
of the biggest responsibilities
decisions will make as parents is how
and where we're going to educate our
children and once you understand that
you can't once you see it you sort of
can't unsee it yeah it's sort of like I
will do I've had parents say to me I
don't care if I need to take a second
job right right I will find a way to pay
the tuition right how much is the
tuition our tuition is ten thousand
dollars a year over 10 months so it's
roughly a thousand dollars a month
and does that actually cover your
expenses yes and okay so that's that's
worth highlighting yeah so so the cost
of the education that you're providing
the kids is how much a month
the the Char the tuition is around ten
thousand dollars per month right there
we give a few per year per 10 sorry
sorry ten thousand dollars per year yes
okay so you know that in in the New York
State
the average cost per student per year is
thirty nine thousand dollars yes right
so you can do it for a quarter of that I
think that we could actually do it for
around our projection right now is that
our all-in costs when we're fully
enrolled about 130 Learners will be
about 4 500 a year per learner
that's why it would be interesting the
metric you need from a measurement
perspective because
you are selecting your students to some
degree based on Parental interest in
education and their ability to pay so
you're going to be tilting in somewhat
up the IQ and socioeconomic scale and
probably tilting it up the
conscientiousness scale a priori the
real Metro could be how fast your
students are learning compared to
comparable students in a public school
system very difficult very difficult
metric to establish yeah so I'm not
being I'm not being skeptical of this
it's just you know very interesting to
derive performance measures and that's a
difficult thing to do so well I would
say there might be a difference in
thinking especially in elementary school
for us in that if you took a learner
from our school at maybe seven or eight
years old and tried to map them with an
elite College Preparatory School you
might find that our learner is behind on
certain areas compared to theirs yeah
that's not a bad thing it's because
children need to be allowed time to be
children and they're not machines to
absorb information yeah yeah well that's
that's also the that's a problem with
measurement is like if you're only
measurement rubric is standardized
testing which is generally the only
reliable and valid objective measure
there are things that are important that
you're not measuring that are hard to
measure so so for example it would be
very useful to measure maturity if you
could figure out how to measure it or if
you could measure pro-social Behavior
you can do that using teacher ratings of
pro-social behavior for example peer
rating so you could derive that but then
you'd need a standardized sample of the
same ratings from other schools to
compare yourself with and the
probability that you be able to drive
that is pretty much a zero so well you
can also look at it this way that
you could compare yourself to another
school or if you get down to the
individual learner level you could
compare yourself to yourself that was
rated before yeah well that would that
would be the right and that's the way we
do yeah so we'll do that with end of
week surveys and it's warm cool warm
feedback for other Learners in in the
studio end of session 360 surveys where
yeah you're rating people oh yeah so
you're using three and those are using
peer ratings absolutely and those are
posted publicly so oh yeah it's not who
said it but here's here's how how each
person what like the comments people had
and so how does that how do okay that's
interesting so how did the kids who are
downgraded in a given week let's say
respond to that you know because they're
being they're being publicly evaluated
so what's the justification for that and
have you seen that go wrong is there
anything that concerns you about that
approach well I think if you if you
first start by understanding that we
spend a lot of time building the tribe
so in general people are polite and
respectful towards each other but they
might say that let's take my son for
instance uh Hudson was uh distracting me
numerous times this week okay if that's
one thing on the survey that he was
distracting and these are the types of
things that you'll see you don't if
there we don't see malicious you know uh
uh comments or something like that we
see hey no trolls yes yes troll free
environment yes trophy environment we
don't we we don't see things uh like
that we see Hudson was uh distracting me
this week from from this and if that
comes up one time that's that could be
noise yeah but if Hudson is going
through and he sees four times people
mentioned how he was distracting them
yeah then it's like looking at that and
saying a reflection point it's like hey
I'm distracted useful tribal feedback
very useful tribal feedback yeah and and
we put in time using Socratic dialogue
in examples of of how to give feedback
like let me give a quick example of
feedback
so when we first started the school
about half a decade ago
um
we had a number of Learners that came in
from Traditional School and maybe they
were uh 10 11 somewhere in there
and our our school year is broken into
sessions they're four to six weeks long
they have a quest that's like you know
we put them in a simulation or they're
solving a big problem or something like
it could be architecture future of
farming they're doing the American
Revolution and those are the afternoons
every day I'll get to that but okay
uh and at the end of that Quest there's
a public exhibition and the public
exhibition is parents grandparents
family members coming in and you're on
stage and this starts roughly at age
seven where you're presenting in front
of all these people
um you make sure the kids speak loudly
enough so everyone in the audience can
hear we uh audience feedback has made
that happen yes good we actually had a
parent offer to buy I used to go to my
kids presentations at their Elementary
School you know they'd be all these kids
on stage and they were all mumbling so
quietly that people even in the first
row of the gymnasium couldn't hear a
damn word they were saying and everybody
in the bloody gym was supposed to sit
there for two hours pretending that this
was acceptable and while the kids on the
stage were pretending to talk and the
teachers were pretending to evaluate yes
yeah painful to say the least I had a
parent in school Jamie he uh that was
happening and he said I'll buy you a
small PA system in this room and we had
we bought it but that that was soft so
yes they they get on stage they speak we
record that and then on Friday so that
happens on the last Thursday of a
session on Friday they get into a circle
the socratic discussion and they give
each other warm cool warm feedback on
how they did what's something you did
well what's something you could improve
what's another thing you did well the
Learners that first came in from
traditional schools called that Friday
Friday because it was so hard to hear
feedback and when you come from an
environment where basically there's only
two grades anymore there's a and not a
that's basically what there is now when
you come from that environment and you
hear you didn't do perfect or didn't do
exactly well well I just failed and so
we would give them the option of hey you
could get written feedback or you could
get verbal feedback yeah the wrong
choice in there is written feedback
because you don't have the context of
the kindness of the person giving it to
you right right but they elected that
for a little bit yeah until they went
back and so learning one of the I would
say a very important lesson in life is
how to take and take the feedback you
can incorporate that and what construct
active feedback is yes right and so in
elementary when they're learning to give
the weekly survey it might be that we
start off start off with like a drop
down menu like you're selecting a
different learner than a drop down like
is is is what is the issue you had
somewhere in here and it's like a
pre-written hey Hudson was distracting
today I'm sorry Hudson
yeah
now this is there for the eternity yes
for eternity
um or in or they can write their own
feedback if it's something specific so
that starts at a very young age this
idea of you know tribal reinforcement
about how do we operate in here do we
have an ethos of how we operate
I'll tell one other anecdote about that
um
we we've learned at that school like
ours we cannot recruit we can't go out
and say
hey would you come to our school the
reason is you have to be looking for
what we're offering you have to believe
I think that's true when you ever almost
whenever you do anything with anyone
it's so much better to have someone come
looking than to go sell yes exactly
I made what I would consider maybe a
mistake saying I I I met these Learners
and I thought gosh their parents were
amazing they thought they'd do a great
job we invited them to apply to the
school and that was a hard lesson I
learned one but one of the most
important lessons there was that these
Learners came in and I often say there's
two behaviors we can't incorporate as a
school one would be a blatant disrespect
for other people in other yeah
manipulation yeah so that's anti-social
Behavior yes and I don't mean that you
get into a conflict we have conflicts
rise all the time and I'll talk about
how we resolve those but
um they these Learners came in the
school and for various reasons they were
highly disrespectful things like that
yeah the tribe came to me in my office
one day the and it's usually the older
girls they they really value order and
and um and I think for some reason what
we see is a lot of the uh older girls
take leadership roles somewhat younger
than some of the younger boys would and
they came to my office and they said hey
look here's all the things we've tried
here's what's going on yeah they just
don't understand we don't do those
things here right right and I said guys
what you're saying is that there's a way
that we do things here that's an ethos
we have something that defines us first
off that's amazing like how amazing is
that we have that yeah and second we
troubleshooted different ways that we
could solve this ultimately owners
weren't weren't fit for the school well
one thing that's worth knowing on that
front by the way is that if anti-social
proclivities are not rectified
by the age of four
they're virtually impossible to rectify
after that no matter what you do right
anti-social Behavior proclivities are
more stable than IQ
and psychologists have tried everything
you can possibly imagine to rectify
anti-social Behavior proclivities with
either zero or negative success
right so so your observation that if you
have kids who are tilted in the overtly
troublemaking Direction and that would
be Associated say with that overt
disrespect for others the probability
that you're going to be able to do
anything about that is extraordinarily
low yeah right it's a it's one of the
most dismal
fragments aspects of the Clinical
Psychology literature because
psychologists have thrown everything
they had at the remediation of
antisocial Behavior the only and with no
with no effect the only exception I've
ever seen to that is the work of someone
named Dan always who
went on an anti-bullying campaign in the
Scandinavian countries and managed that
quite effectively but he did that really
through a cultural transformation of the
schools rather than a focus on the
individual behavior of Any Given
students so anyways all right so let's
go back to the days so yeah we've we've
gone through the socratic dialogue we've
gone through the meetings with the
mentors and and I think that's pretty
much where we stopped in terms of
progressing through an actual day and
then you are going into what we call
self-directed courses oh yeah we talked
about the Khan Academy a bit there too
and so you're going to self-directed
core skills and now I think the
important thing to understand about a
school like ours and this is where my
what I mentioned earlier is so important
is the system is so much different and
our schools largely ran by systems and
recipes that we hand off to Learners so
for instance people would say well
you're saying that the guide doesn't
have the traditional role in the
classroom that they are not there for uh
telling Learners what to do
how do you get Learners to do work what
what and so well number one if
something's gamified and it's fun they
want to do it and they actually really
enjoy doing it so even something that's
gamified like Khan Academy or some of
these other platforms it's enjoyable for
them to do and it's enjoyable for them
to watch their progress yeah and I think
it's a progress towards the goal that
really gets them you know maybe it's
dopamine or something like that that it
triggers but also within the school what
you think of the school as like being
embedded in a game we have what are
called Freedom levels and So within the
studio you have the ability to earn your
freedom by solely by the work that you
do it's not subjective it is it's you
earn this a guide cannot take this away
from you and so for instance say you
move up one percent in Khan Academy in
your grade level
and the grade level is based on where
are you at right now and you'll make
goals towards where do you want to be
well you move up one percent you earn 20
points so this is the game if you earn
300 points within a week the next week
you're at the highest Freedom level
means that next week you get to choose
what you work on when you work on it and
where you work on it within our sort of
like life yes very much so and and so
but also if you say hey uh I if you're
distracted for a week or something like
that you're getting less work done you
might be on freedom level one and that
would look like hey you have a desk and
there's what you do what what the
schedule look like on the board and but
and what we find is that 80 to 90
percent of the Learners are on freedom
level two or three they want the
additional Freedom it's enough of
incentive just to say I have the agency
over my time in the day I know the steps
I need to take to get it they've agreed
and helped develop this system it's been
a part of what they've done and so it's
how you incentivize eyes you know maybe
uh work or hard work but the true answer
especially the younger you are is that
gamification of work is enough you have
fun game to play and I often ask people
talk to people if they say hey the
studio is getting a bit uh disorderly it
happens I would ask well what's wrong
with the game that we're setting up how
can we make the game more fun to play
and so so that's of course okay so if I
objected well
life isn't going to be fun so how do you
know you're not setting up a micro
environment for children that isn't
representative of the macro environment
to which they'll have to adapt
no I mean I I enjoy the descriptions of
the programs that you're putting forward
and I would I would love to believe that
that was all true without any
reservation but you know I'm trying to
allow myself as many skeptical thoughts
as I can possibly manage and so and I am
curious about this I mean I know that
Khan Academy has had a lot of success in
their mathematics training and I know
they use a gamified approach but that
what that really is is a carefully
Divine Design system of incentives
rewards that are that actually match the
motivational structure of the Learners
you could call that gamified but it's
actually just adapted properly for
learning but but do you feel that
do you feel that you are preparing the
kids for the realities of the real real
world and what evidence do you have that
that might actually be the case
when you say reality is a real real
world can you be specific on that like
what well that that that's a good that's
a good objection actually well let's say
um let's say that 30 40 of your regret
your your graduates at you know after
high school go and get a just an
ordinary job a construction job uh job
in a restaurant uh a job in a local
store a job
um are they are they going to be fit for
those positions given the experiences
that they've had in the in your in your
school I think
were maybe prematurely asking the
question and here's why I say that
Elementary is very different than middle
which is very different than high school
so there is a progression upwards so
okay okay if I gave you the goals of
studiosis ahead of time saying if you're
under Middle School it's this love
learning and learn to get along with
people okay so Elementary is by Design
about developing a love of learning why
is that is because when you get into
Middle School the if I had to put one
sentence goal be learn to work hard for
three hours a day which is awesome
so you're you're inculcating a more
conscientious Focus increasingly as they
progress absolutely all right okay well
that's very that's a very good answer
all right all right and so you've built
that in where it's developmentally
appropriate you said your goal is yeah
actual on task work for three hours a
day and yeah you're right you can you
can you can you can have a wonderful
life if you can work
focused on one thing for three hours a
day yes yeah and that that's actually a
very very high level of attainment to
manage that yes and they do it in middle
school and I'll talk about how and why
but yes the the design of elementary
school is more exploration love of
learning social learning to get along
with other people and I'll give you an
example of that about and this applies
to the real world and success in the
real world
at a normal school if you find that you
have uh maybe a continuous conflict with
another learner maybe at a large school
one of the most common things is they'll
separate those Learners in different
classrooms yeah but that that's not what
you can do in life is that every time
you have a conflict with somebody that
you or a big conflict that you're going
to just remove that person from your
life well it also doesn't necessarily
eliminate the conflict right it doesn't
it actually does maybe does the opposite
of enforcing the negative behavior yeah
yeah and so I wonder what happens is if
you have a conflict with another learner
either learner can call a conflict
resolution session and you can have a 30
minute cooldown period if emotions are
high yeah yeah they'll do a what so what
what happens is they will find a mentor
what we call Peacemaker from the middle
school or High School somebody that's
earned their chops so to speak in
helping to make peace in the school and
they sit across from each other as a
three-foot table with the mentor on the
side and the mentor has a formal
conflict resolution these happen two
three times a day that because conflicts
happen in society that's just the way it
is and so the mentor will read off it
starts like this why are we here we're
here because Heroes solve problems they
don't run from problems and then it goes
into what you would consider like a
speaker listener exercise each person
gets a chance to be heard have it
repeated back to them and vice versa
they negotiate a bit in there at the end
of it is what's one concrete item the
other person could do to make this
situation better more yeah that's very
good yeah and that takes negotiation by
the way absolutely and that is
negotiation yes because maybe something
you propose the other person could do
wouldn't be something they think they
actually can do yeah but Jordan we see
this happen with six and a half year
olds that are learning to get their
voice they'll call a conflict resolution
on something it's older than them and
they know that one of these mentors in
the middle school or High School are
going to give them a fair Shake and they
get to have their voice heard sometimes
it's an intimidating you know set of
circumstances but it one of the one of
the most fulfilling things you can see
in a situation like that is a young
person learning to know that if they can
voice what how they're feeling properly
that they can be heard and issues in
their life can be addressed yeah yeah uh
yeah well and you're moving the kids
towards reconciliation absolutely yeah
conflict is inevitable and
Reconciliation is possible but it has to
be negotiated and so the the strategy
that you laid forward there is very wise
yes okay so back now so the kids are are
concentrating on exercises like Khan
Academy that's on the mathematics front
what else are they learning in
elementary school
deep books they're going they're going
into deep books badge books and so
they'll it's part of the reading so
they'll be selecting books to read that
are um uh that they can earn a badge for
so to how do they learn to read so you
usually in the younger studio so we have
a Montessori Studio that starts before
this that's where they generally learn
to read one of the uh one of the items
of success in our elementary studio is a
basic Proficiency in reading so you
either come in knowing how to read or
will work with you on programs like
Lexia or something like that to build
your reading profession so these are
these are programs that are external
again like com that have been designed
to help kids run through a phonics
training program how do they teach them
differently yes basically it's Alexia
Reading yeah Lexia is one of those that
we use it's reading it's reading
comprehension or or just basic reading
but and you're impressed with these
programs well I've seen them work very
well yeah yeah but you know I think
ultimately young people want to learn
and and I think something that's also
very true about this whole discussion is
that
there's something very different between
teaching and learning and they're two
completely different things in that
sense
I don't know that it's true I I actually
think it is true that all learning is
self-learning and self-motivated
learning and so
yes at the younger ages
getting into the exploration of learning
maybe three through six age in the
Montessori Studio that we have that's
where they first get introduced to
reading and then they'll they'll as they
get through Middle School they'll really
master that you know level of reading
but they'll start with books that are
appropriate for their age level and for
their their uh competency in Reading how
did you identify those books
well it's not necessarily up to us we we
select a library of books but they can
pitch any book they like if they like a
book that they to have in the library so
okay I see so you crowdsource that
problem absolutely and and here's the
reason why you have to look at what is
the goal of reading the goal of reading
is to help somebody develop a love of
reading and the way you develop a love
of reading is by reading what you love
and so one Surefire way to make sure
that somebody doesn't like to read is to
force them to read things that they're
not interested in and
and what what I found young people
especially learn from this is if you're
forcing them to do this work uh
something that they don't want to do
they might do it because maybe that you
know they they're pressured to get this
grade or something like that usually
they're memorized it rather than learn
it yeah but they often hate it do they
just resent it yeah and they also resent
the adult that makes them do it yeah
well and then they'll resent the whole
damn Enterprise yes you know because
you'll have kids I remember I had
friends like this who said I hate
reading it's like well
you know that's a terrible thing for a
child to say because to say you hate
reading is the same as saying I hate
exploring I hate thinking I hate
discussing right and but I mean they
were very honest in their hatred and the
reason they hated it is because well
they weren't taught how to do it well
and then they were forced into reading
things that they didn't want to here's
something I remember from grade eight I
think this pissed me off more than
anything that ever happened to me in
junior high and there were a lot of
things that happened in junior high that
I wasn't very happy about and this was
probably the top of the list so
um I was a very fast reader as a kid and
I could generally
read all the books for the year in
English class in the first two or three
days and I would usually do that by
reading those books behind a textbook in
all the other classes and so I remember
telling my teacher I don't know three
days into the bloody English course that
I had read old books and her answer was
read them again and I thought you know
that's really a bad answer because what
I just announced to you was that I
already did all the work for the Year
this week and I was basically asking you
you know could you give me some more
books and by the way this is a school so
you'd think that would be a place where
that question could be reasonably asked
and the answer was do the work you've
already done again and make sure that
you don't have any enjoyment whatsoever
while you're pursuing it plus shut the
hell up and don't bother me again right
yeah I should say in that same school I
had a librarian there Sandy naughtly who
uh was the wife of the of the Socialist
leader in town in the MLA and I used to
go to the library and she would give me
books and and good books yeah and she
taught me a lot because she'd give me a
book and I'd read it and I'd tell her
and she'd give me another book and that
was unbelievably useful that was
self-guided learning in some ways and so
I really loved that my dad had two he
was teaching grade six at that point he
used a system called SSRI which was
sussain styling sustained sustained
silent self-reinforced instruction
something like that I haven't got the
acronym exactly right but it was grad
graded texts in a file folder of
increasing difficulty with
self-evaluation and you could progress
that through that at your own rate God I
loved that I would have I would have had
a fine time in school I had to feel
empowered by that too well plus there
was a challenge constantly no one I
could find the edge of my reading
ability and start to play with that
instead of having to read things that
you know I had figured out I'd read like
four years before so
it was gay I suppose that was an early
form of gamification but it isn't really
gamification it's just using the
processes of of incentive reward
properly well and that's a crucial part
of gamification is that right is it
incentive rewards it's proper
incentivization so maybe at a young age
it is gamification in some ways maybe if
that's like how well a game is actually
an activity where the incentive rewards
are lined up properly that's how you
define a game so it it isn't like a game
exists outside that it's that a game is
a micro environment that's structured so
optimally that people will engage in
being there voluntarily yes right I
think that's a huge point of engaging
being there yes absolutely yeah well you
know there's a there's a moral rule in
in some ways that emerges out of that
which is that if you haven't set up the
environment so that the participants
will engage in it voluntarily you set up
a pathological environment it's a
tyranny or it's either tyranny or chaos
those are the Alternatives I wonder we
say something like this look if we're if
there's an issue in the studio involving
two to three learners okay well likely
they're going through something and they
have you know like they have a lot of
energy or they're not interested in
what's happening right now if it's 50 of
the studio what are we doing wrong right
how are we making the game wrong yeah
but about reading this I think this is
very important I had I had a um a parent
that was interested in the school say to
me you know well how do you determine
what they must read and he was very much
in the classical education side which I
have a lot of like I I really enjoy a
lot of that and he said well you're
telling me that they don't have to read
these great books they don't they're not
forced to read these great books and I
went through this idea of reading and
developing a love for reading and also
that I would ask maybe pose a question
something like this what's more
important
the four years maybe of high school that
you're engaged in Reading deep books
making sure they do that or making sure
they love reading so much that the next
60 years is filled with enjoyable
reading right right and I think that's
maybe well and people will if you teach
them to love reading they will advance
in their reading to their zone of
proximal development and they'll read
the most complex books they can manage
assuming they have enough knowledge to
find those books people will do that
automatically yes and so you might say
well you should instill a love of the
classics and what that would mean
optimally is that you inform people that
great books exist and you show them
where they are but you pretty much have
to let them come to those books on their
own and they may not be able to do that
well maybe maybe ever in their whole
life because great books tend to be
relatively complex on the intellectual
front but they may have to come to that
obliquely like in a lot of Behavioral
psychologists will give their clients
self-help books and intellectuals in the
popular culture sure are they have
derogatory attitude towards self-help
books I mean the whole genre is like
well that's self-help it's like well
first of all what's your objection to
that exactly
you don't think people should be trying
to help themselves yeah and then I don't
know if you notice but that's actually
introductory philosophy moral philosophy
that's what a self-help book is and you
might say well I have contempt
for it because it's introductory it's
like well where the hell do you expect
people to start most people don't even
read
right and then when you see people who
are willing to take a step into the
domain of self-help it means they've
actually progressed and they're reading
enough so they're starting to
contemplate the elementary ideas of
moral philosophy and even theology it's
like you should do everything you can to
reward that right well it's an Awakening
of sorts for them and it's like that's
for sure who are we to say that the
point at which they're Awakening is the
point is not the point that they should
be at it's like they're in a journey
right now and this is where they should
be because they've elected for that to
be the place and how can we criticize
them for not being in a different place
yeah well you do that by you know
proclaiming your moral superiority on
hypothetical intellectual grounds yes
it's a pretty path it's a pretty
pathetic game so so okay so you've got
your kids you you're instilling in them
a love of reading at least in principle
by teaching them to read so you know
that kids actually tend not to enjoy
reading so to speak until they can read
a phrase at something like a glance and
they can start re reading for meaning
rather than to have to struggle with
word comprehension and so part of the
trick with teaching kids of course is to
get them past the point of stumbling
over words so that so that it becomes as
easy to read as it does to talk or to
listen let's say so but you've solved
that problem to some degree by using
these sophisticated sophisticated
reading education programs that are
analogous in some ways to the Khan
Academy it I would say that's part of
the solution you know when I say
solution it's just we're providing them
the tool to be able to unlock something
that they really want and they want to
know how to read they want to be able to
get a book off a shelf to be able to
read it but I think also
you have to rethink what what you're
thinking of as reading why can't a comic
book be there as reading why can a
graphic novel be there as reading and it
can be and the younger ones love those
and so they can develop that love of
reading by something that like we would
think well where's the content value in
something like this and but in many of
these are great stories but well they're
not popular novels unless they have a
they're not popular literary
um
Endeavors unless they have the capacity
to grip the attention of the reader and
they're not going to grip the attention
of the reader unless they tell a good
story so I think that is self-selecting
I mean a story won't elicit attention
from a reader if it isn't doing
something for them yes
so to the process of the school
so yes we'll engage in reading so what
does the reading process look like well
number one they'll pick a book that
would cost you a badge book something
that they would is maybe at their level
of development that you know on the cusp
of being difficult right something that
and it also maybe is interesting
possibly associated with their hero's
journey something like that but this
could be a who is book or something like
that at the younger ages then they'll
read that book and write a review on
that book and then they'll read that
review during a Socratic discussion or
after one completes before they break
the circle
the younger ages that's it you read it
you write the simple review on it the
review it doesn't have a word count like
requirement it doesn't have anything
like that the idea is that you've read a
book you've written and you've answered
three or four questions on it what was
your favorite character what surprised
you the most things like that and then
you presented in front of the tribe then
as you get into the older Studios
they'll actually vote on your book
review did it meet the requirements do
we feel like they met like really
understood the plot line or something
like that or and also is there evidence
that they didn't read the book so
there's some self reinforcing here and
they can if they deny the book the book
review so to speak it's not oh it's done
it's like hey address these things and
then come back and represent repeat yeah
that's good yeah yeah and what this and
then the next book they read for their
next batch book one of The Rules is it
needs to be more difficult than the last
so maybe they're not ready to do a badge
book review for a while again because
they're still working on reading
proficiency they have a goal the book
they want to do next but they're not
quite there yet and so they're striving
for something there but what this tears
up to if you look at I'll give you a
quick story about what I walked into on
the middle school one day
and mind you this is all from this
system of not forcing reading working to
make reading fun and
so I walked into the middle school one
day and it was during a time in the
schedule called drop everything and read
and so it's just we're all they're all
reading I saw three girls and one boy
sitting and we have kind of like it's
more it looks like a shared workspace
some something comfy like this they're
they're sitting in different chairs
reading and the books that I saw them
reading were Atlas Shrugged the boys who
challenged Hitler The Da Vinci Code and
unbroken and this is all from without us
saying you need to read any of any of
these books this is from them going to
the shelf and when you get in Middle
School a deep book is a book that's won
an award to change the world in some way
and that's like kind of how you pitch a
book that you'd like to be a deep book
and so by giving them options in
selection they wanted to challenge
themselves and they wanted to read about
like heroic stories and that was that's
just something that uh when I walk in
and see something like that I'm thinking
like yes this is the way this should be
that they're moving up in this
progression of of Excellence or maybe
proficiency or something like that yeah
and they're voluntarily choosing to go
into these deep stories
all right so back how much more content
should we cover content process with
regard to elementary school well I think
one thing I failed to mention at the
beginning is our years couched in what I
call badge plan and so a badge plan is
at the beginning of the year you're
after a couple weeks being in the studio
because we really make the first session
remember our years or four to six week
sessions and we take at least a week
break so we take four to six week
session and in that first session a
learner will start working a badge plan
for the year and basically what they're
doing on their own at first is saying
this is what I'd like to accomplish in
reading and math and writing questions
they're starting to Envision goals for
themselves and how how young this starts
at roughly seven years oh yeah that's
really good and but and it's important
for parents to know this is that that is
not an accurate assessment at seven
years old it requires like feedback you
can say hey I'd like to accomplish four
grade levels of math this year well
that's a great ambition but what they'll
get it is then feedback from a guide and
from parents on saying hey do we think
these are smart goals and we really use
that rubric that they're specific
measurable but what I really like to
focus what is the Smart goal specific
measurable attainable relevant and
time-bound yeah okay so and we're too
great we start we have a rubric of
evaluation for their vision and that's
also peer evaluated absolutely and that
gives the peer something evaluated hey
great this is really specific that you
want to accomplish three great levels of
math this year but is it attainable yeah
and they'll walk through like what that
could look like so at the beginning of
the year they set out a badge plan that
badge plan is a signature is put on it
by the student a signature is put on it
by the guide once once they go over it
and say it's it's filled with smart
goals yeah and then parents and that
essentially sets the stage yes and
that's another thing we need to talk
about a little bit is contracts within
the studio but yeah that is one of them
that then they have a document that says
here's what we've all agreed I'm doing
this year and so right if you need to
reflect a plan have a plan and a goal
and a goal and we do a check-in on this
halfway through the year and they can
adjust their goals at that point did I
set two hard of goals were they too easy
where did I get all my badge book Suns
right away because I was so focused on
the love of reading that I have for
Harry Potter or something like that
and so they'll have they'll have that as
their their plan
uh and then at the end of the year
they'll check in on that plan how did I
do and that is not a graded process it's
an iterative process to get better and
better at making a making goals that you
can attain yeah well right it's also
it's also a great way of inculcating
what the process of coming to
self-knowledge but also accurate
self-knowledge you know we we tend to
think especially in our idiot culture
that people are transparent to
themselves I can Define who I am and
that's simply not true because you're
too complex to be transparent to
yourself and so you're going to have all
sorts of delusional ideas
some negative and some too positive
about who you are and what you're
capable of and part of the way you
modify that so you come to a realistic
appraisal of yourself is by smacking
yourself up against the world and
succeeding or failing but also by
encountering other people who go
yeah I don't think so or who Pat you on
the background I'm saying good job right
and so by having kids
develop an unrealistic Vision to begin
with which is what's going to happen
with young kids because what the hell do
they know and then by modifying that
with peer evaluation and guide
evaluation you're also helping the
children come to a much more yes what
precise and accurate understanding of
who they are and how they can foster
their own development absolutely that's
really nice to have that inculcated so
young okay so so the kids have a
contract and they develop a goal and the
peers give them feedback their teacher
their their guide their parents so
they're they're coming to more accurate
self-evaluation what's let's turn our
attention to middle school and high
school we've concentrated a fair bit in
elementary and that's fine so
so lay out the situation in Middle
School form yeah and I think just
briefly something I'd say about uh the
re the reason I think there's a big
folks in elementary school is that most
schools in the United States get
preschool kindergarten right it's don't
take it too seriously have a lot of fun
explore the basics be social when you
get into Elementary School it's like
there's a switch that flips it says Hey
College is coming school's not fun
homework is here and so I think what
Wonder does is we're able to take that
period of childhood and allow it to
still be childhood but there comes a
time when you need to like start to move
up and that's why we say Elementary love
learning get along with other people in
Middle School
work truly hard for at least three hours
a day in flow but and then I'll add High
School there too have a tested embedded
idea of what you'd like to do with your
life and so let me back integrate into
that yeah with it in in elementary or in
Middle School
you are doing far more I would say
you're you're getting you're still doing
Socratic launches every day you have the
kind of core work that you're working
what's the age range for your middle
school it's 11 to 13 somewhere in that
range and it's okay it's a bit fluid
because in a normal school the constant
is how how long you can take to do some
work the variable is how proficient you
are at it in our school with Mastery the
the constant is we Master we work for
Mastery the variables how long it takes
to get it to get that done and so if it
takes you a few months or whatever extra
do that that's okay and it it works
within the system so they have a similar
structure where they're doing morning
core skills work afternoon quests it's
very much built on challenges that are
delivered from a guide to the Learners
and they go through on their own with
challenges in western civilization with
writer's workshop and they're building
that body of work throughout a session
three out of six weeks the key if I
worked broadly at middle school and high
school the key is that and this is maybe
a thought about a protest against
delayed maturation is that if you look
at some people that we really respect in
the world like Da Vinci you could look
at Carnegie these people start
apprenticing at age 12 and 13. they were
in the real world getting real world
experience at age 12 and 13. and
Michelangelo Michelangelo and so there's
no reason that young people today aren't
capable of the same thing and so one of
the defining characteristics of our
middle school as you're working on hard
work and remember mind you we have if
done properly at our school there's no
homework at any point throughout the
school this is all done within the time
frames that we have at school the
progress how long are your school days
roughly 9 to 3 30. okay so standard
standard schooling yes yeah and so
what you'll start in middle school is
your apprenticeship process so you're
starting to confine you're starting to
constrain that your State's exploration
and Elementary as you get into Middle
School you're really starting to hone in
right and you can work three hours and
so this is also the unanswered the
question that I posed earlier which is
how do you make sure that this is
aligned with the real world yes and part
of your answer is well we put kids out
in the real world they're in the real
world starting at 11. so starting at 11
you'll get your first apprenticeship and
and that apprenticeship starts like this
then this this is something I think is
so important is that one guides and
parents don't secure apprenticeships for
our Learners the Learners do we help
them with recipes for it and here's like
what a recipe would be number one what
do you love take things that you've
learned in the world experiences you've
had experience you've had in elementary
school where you explored through all
these quests that we do in the afternoon
take all that and
develop and develop a list of 10 Heroes
that you have based on something that
you would love to do you'd love to learn
more about maybe it's videography say in
elementary we did this Quest on
videography I loved it you know in
middle school you'll take that you'll
you'll find heroes in that field locally
you'll take those 10 Heroes narrow it
down to three and then from those three
Heroes you go through a process of
finding their email address and this is
local this is local yeah it can't it can
be otherwise you can do it otherwise
there's probably more what somebody
might do in high school but to start
with those I'll give some examples too
because they're very powerful
you have Heroes you narrow it down you
find their email address your you have
to write an email that will get opened
first which is not always easy for busy
people yeah number two in that in that
email you have to make the case for how
they've inspired you like what work have
you done to research this person what do
you know about them and then how can you
explain your teaching them how to do a
really high quality job applications
really absolutely and if you get one of
these it's like I've gotten one from a
Learner in the Middle School
unexpectedly who wanted to start a
school like ours that's her that's her
journey in life
and I read it and I was like there's
just no way I could I could like turn
this down it's just no way I couldn't do
it but so they're writing an email one
that will get open two in that email
they're requesting a five minute phone
call in that five minute phone call
they're requesting a 10 minute in-person
meeting right and in that very sneaky
yes in that in first I mean they're
requesting a six-week apprenticeship and
but it's all very genuine meaning it's
like saying this is a person that's
inspired me in my life this is something
that I I want I have specific things I
want to learn from them and so a couple
examples of that in our school
um we now have high school our oldest
age is 16 right now just because we grow
with the Learners that are at the older
ages we don't enroll into High School
you really need to start at the at the
lower ages and work up you could
probably guess why yeah have you tried
it yes and what's been your what's been
your experience
they're too cynical no it's happening
usually a lack of self-motivation you
come into an environment where no adult
is telling you what to do every day
right and you've been in a knockoff and
you've been in an environment where
everybody's been telling you all the
time and that's why I tell people about
the role of our guide is that the reason
our guides don't answer questions like
like like they do is that in life
there's not somebody standing over your
shoulder all the time giving you answer
the things but the information is at
your fingertips if you know how to
properly utilize it and you're motivated
to do so and we know this kids are doing
this every day right they're not doing
it for their schoolwork because it's not
interesting or fun to them but they're
doing it for the things that they're
passionate about in the world on YouTube
and things like that
so
for for one example we have a young girl
in the school
and her grandfather is somebody that uh
works with the wrongfully accused and at
a young age that took hold of her and
she's very inspired by that so at age 11
maybe 12 right in there she decided she
wanted to be an attorney potentially and
so she did this whole process and she's
went through this process now for three
years I believe where she's validated
this idea that yes this is what I want
to do which by the way one of the most
important takeaways from apprenticeship
you could probably have is that I don't
want to do this thing that I thought I
did definitely we've got stories about
that too but she's done that and now at
age 15 she's participated in jury
selections depositions these things she
she's on the way to be doing the work
that somebody that is uh graduated from
uh college is just starting to do right
she's doing that work right and one
other example what sort of feedback are
you getting about her from the people
she's been apprenticing too we've well I
would say that I have an a quick answer
about that well one of the one of the
girls that is in the studio as well she
wanted to uh intern Apprentice at this
pet store this she wants to work with
animals in a zoo and things like that
she was too young to be hired as as an
apprentice but they said hey we'll let
you Shadow and so she went into Shadow
and then and it was just their personal
policy that she couldn't be hired until
this age a certain age
she went and did that and after after
that next year they said we were so
impressed by the work that you did that
we've changed our policy so that you can
come work here and I think when you're
coming up in this environment and you're
learning how to work well with other
people and what these Learners say uh we
tell they understand is that be happy to
do any job right it doesn't matter if
you're emptying the garbage cans like
you're getting into somewhere yeah and
somebody's giving you their time and
Jordan a powerful thing I might want to
say here is I think
this is a very important point is that
the role of a mentor
is an opt-in relationship
meaning
I think that's often the confusion with
maybe a teacher that's wanting to bring
a personal thought into a classroom is
that
that's a mentorship relationship
meaning a young person asks you to be a
mentor or seeks you out as a mentor
otherwise the job is academic like
parents are sending their kids to school
to learn academics and and I think
that's what's so powerful is they're
electing their mentors here so the last
thing I'll mention about uh
apprenticeships because mind you they
start at 11 and they'll go all the way
through high school and there's a
process for this but the last thing I'll
mention is that we had one girl that was
uh and I'm mentioning girls here I've
also we also have boys that have done
great apprenticeships as well she
thought for sure I want to be a
veterinarian and she at 11 interned with
a veterinarian who's a surgeon she loves
horses loves animals
the the first sign of the surgery room
and what couldn't handle it almost
almost lost it so to speak and that was
an amazing learning for her at a young
age because when might you learn that
otherwise if maybe it's after
undergraduate school or something like
that right and so she knows I still want
to work with animals I love them but
this direction isn't the precise
direction right what an amazing learning
right yeah yeah yeah so that's that's
how we look at apprenticeships in the
school they start at age 11. so you're
still doing your core skills type of
work still moving up in bad or deep
books you're doing chemistry physics
biology
much more intentionally I would say so
you're doing medical biology and
um chemistry and we're making it very uh
very relatable
um and then in high school this is where
it really kind of everything comes
together so you've have a love of
learning you know how to work well with
other people you have the habits of hard
work and now what is it it's you've in
Middle School you've also tested this
idea in the world you've gone out in the
world do things and so what happens in
high school is what we call the next
great adventure and the next great
adventure really is you're declaring
after doing three to four years of
apprenticing this is where I want to
this is where I fit into the world this
is what I want to do so you're declaring
you're putting a flag in the ground and
then with that you're going on a journey
of deliberate work through high school
and that deliberate work
is number one declaring it saying this
is what I'm going to do number two
you're doing you're finding people in
that industry and you're doing a minimum
of 10 interviews with these people that
have done what you would like to do and
have inspired you in some way and then
through that you're asking them you know
tough questions these are long pretty
long interviews that people people
um say yes to
then from there you're going into uh
deliberate practices of this work so it
could be getting a credential on the
work from a third party Source or it
could be
um uh and the kids figure out how to do
this themselves essentially we have we
have recipes yeah process we hand off to
them yeah and that they engage in this
process absolutely but there's never a
time when adults going to help you with
your interview or meaning like they're
going to be there at the interview with
you or anything like that yeah there's
not a time when they're going to help
you secure an apprenticeship and how are
the high school kids monitoring
themselves and why does that work
explain to me well you you in we walked
through the elementary school situation
where there were kids from six and a
half to eleven participating in high
school the age is what 14 to 18 18. and
it's the same basic model the kids
yourself the young people are
self-monitoring and did they turn the 14
year olds do they turn to the 18 year
olds for mentoring is that absolutely
and it just happens naturally meaning
like and they're already accustomed to
doing this it's it's it's you know when
you walk into an organization you can
see the culture is way different in this
place than it is otherwise that's how
that's how it would look there's times
when our men middle school high school
guide will be out of the studio for long
periods of time and they've actually
said to him
you know he he was gone our middle
school high school guide is a stellar
individual and he loves what he does he
was gone for a number of days once and
so I was sort of doing the check-ins
with the learner Learners and when he
got back he said hey what did you like
and not like it when it's gone and their
response to him was we actually like it
when you work outside of the studio more
because it reduces the Temptation for us
to go to you with a question and it
requires us to to work together on these
items so yes right it's similar
necessity yep peer-to-peer
accountability yeah and and uh and work
so now have you had students graduate
from high school and go on to colleges
and universities already have you been
in operation long enough for that to
happen our oldest right now is 16 but in
our network of schools and we're we're
just one school I'm only I only speak
for ours
um yes absolutely there's been Learners
that went up through this same model
that have went on to create
apprenticeships go to different
different types of colleges and uh you
know start jobs things like that do you
have any idea how your kids are doing
when they go out out of the schools into
the actual world
well I think we hear anecdotes about
that about
somewhat of what you talked about before
about hey there is sort of like
you're leaving this environment which is
basically a civil society yeah is what
we said right right is what's set up
there that's governed by Learners with
appropriate handoffs of systems and
recipes
and so there's comments about what they
see maybe that it's very difficult for
people to make decisions like not not
them for other people that went through
different models it's a very common
thing that we see and uh and that a lot
of the work maybe in undergrad seems
like fake work right we know it is it is
and so those are comments but I think
the idea is that they're they have
they've developed agency to go out into
the world and aim towards something that
is very valuable I wonder if your kids
are going to be statistically more
likely to be entrepreneurs right because
my suspicions are that they would have
some
I wouldn't say difficult difficulty
fitting into traditional environments
but unwillingness to do so and the
proclivity to set up systems of their
own that actually function properly
which is one of the advantages of course
of setting up your own school or your
own business is that yeah I think that's
that is okay so if parents we're running
out of time on this segment we're going
to flip over to the Daily wire plus side
momentarily and and uh I'm gonna walk uh
Zach through some autobiography
biographical reminiscences and talk
about how his Destiny and his calling
came to be let's say but
um let's close this off practically
speaking so a lot of the people who are
listening to or watching this are going
to be interested in while learning more
and also about how they might maneuver
so that they can set up a school like
this in their local environment so
what's what are the what are the
practical what do they need to know
practically in order to manage that well
I think number one practically you need
to know the type of school and model
that this is we've talked a lot about it
here but
being at wonder is a journey for parents
and Learners and what I mean by that is
the process that we're actually engaging
from from a psychological standpoint a
therapeutic standpoint for parents might
be something like differentiation and
because you have to you have to be able
to be willing to let your learner
succeed and fail so if you're ready for
a journey like that truly ready for that
which so yeah you're teaching the
parents how to let their kids be
independent or how to Foster that
Independence yeah that's a good deal
well how else will we be able to well I
would say this
when you make when you set up an
environment like this where young people
have agency
if we're taking that agency away
arbitrarily we're not really helping
them without the agency absolutely and
so you have to give them sort of like a
space that's theirs that we all agree
the journey you're on we've made a badge
plan as well yeah now you go off and
accomplish this we believe in you and I
often say to parents that something I'll
say to my kids is look
this is your journey it's not my journey
yeah right yeah I am just so glad to be
a cheerleader on the sideline and I I
cannot wait to see what you do right so
if you're if a parent is really ready to
say hey I want my child to be one of the
people who leaves school with agency and
ready to launch off into the world I
think you can look at Wonder we're
looking to expand our schools as well
and and you can look at Acton Academy
and there's many schools around there's
maybe 300 schools in in the Acton
Academy Network and
um now and there's plans to expand that
oh is well it's consistently expanding
based on parent entrepreneurs that want
to take on this hero's journey of their
own and so you know right now we're
looking specifically we're in Kansas you
know we're looking in Iowa as well my
home state
um to expand our schools and the purpose
is just to allow more young people to
have this experience in life because I
had somebody say to me once and these
kids are so lucky and my thought to them
was no this is what they deserve they
deserve to be able to have like agency
over their life appropriately at a young
age to have mentors and people that they
look up to it isn't even though you know
it isn't even only that they deserve it
right I mean you could say well you're
you're optimizing a juvenile polity that
that reflects how the world could be and
should be constructed but it isn't just
that the kids deserve it it's that
because they're such a stellar resource
it's appallingly inefficient and
pathetic of society not to utilize their
full resources and so because you know
one of the things you made mention of
early in our conversation was that you
know each person has something to offer
in the world that's unique and people
are unique I mean we're all human but
each of us has something about him or
her that's not ever going to be
replicated and that needs to be brought
forward and it's in everyone's interest
to ensure that that's brought forward
and you start that by not demoralizing
children right so if there's a social
interest here too that that isn't that
isn't merely limited to the individual
I think Paris maybe don't understand how
deep that extent goes and I'll just real
quickly give this example imagine you
have an eight-year-old that's just
starting to write and they're starting
to write stories and they bring you this
little book that they've written yeah
the appropriate response to that is wow
yeah like was this here's what you did
well yes here's what you could improve
on boy it's great you've done that yes
the pro yeah the proof response wow how
hard was this for you to do looks like
you worked really hard on this yeah what
we all have a a tendency to do is say
hey but did you notice you spelled this
word right right right and there's
nothing that's more demoralizing to an
eight-year-old that's just accomplished
something that they're proud of than to
hear how they didn't do it right yeah
yeah and so if so I would just say for
for parents that have this belief want
this for their children there's schools
out there like action Academy who wonder
and you know the idea of where where can
they go we can put the links and so
forth in the description of the video
but where can they go to find out more
information so to find out more
information about Wonder our website is
daringtowonder.com daringto wonder.com
and can I tell you a quick story about
where that came from sure GK Chesterton
I read something from him a long ago in
his essay on Authority and education
and he said this he said that even back
then one of the biggest problems that he
saw was that
um the newest ideas were being taught to
the youngest people meaning that they
hadn't been vetted these ideas hadn't
been fed but they're somehow making
their way into the to the school and he
said that's the exact opposite the
oldest ideas should be the first things
taught and he said true education
is to believe something so confidently
to know so confidently that's true that
you would dare to tell it to a child
I just thought thinking about what's
happening in the world today and how
like the new ideas are infiltrating
quickly without being vetted yeah it's
going back to this idea of that you
would know something so truthfully that
you dare to tell it to your child right
I think that's the appropriate guiding
principle well that's a that's a really
good place to end and it's a very good
time to end so I guess what we'll do is
end
um I'm going to thank you everyone who's
watching and listening for your time and
attention and you know I've been
fascinated by what the acting academy
and and and other uh sophisticated
Advanced and forward-eeming schools have
been doing you know and I'm going to do
an interview at some point with Kate
verbal saying about uh her approach in
the UK which is quite radically
different than your approach and I was
struck immensely by the success of her
school
um it's it's a much more formalized
system of learning but as I said there's
there isn't necessarily only one way to
solve a complex problem and it's not
like she's not teaching her students to
be autonomous because she's definitely
teaching them to be autonomous so that
element is is very much shared
um but um well thank you very much for
coming in and talking in more detail
about what the schools are doing for
those of you who are watching you might
if you like this and you're interested
in you might also want to check out the
discussion I had with Jeff Sandifer
which was more abstract in some ways
um this this part of the reasons I could
I wanted to talk was to fill in the
anecdotal details and to describe in
some more detail what was actually
happening on the ground in the schools
and so you know I think that was very
useful and also very interesting I'd
like to come down at one point and you
know spend a couple of days watching
your school just to see because I'd like
to see exactly what's going on for
myself I also think that would be very
fun so maybe we'll we'll do something
like that in the future that'd be a good
thing to plan and so
um well your website again
daringtowonder.com yeah and the Acton
Academy website for further
accessacademy.org actonacademy.org all
right well thank you for everyone for
watching and listening I'm gonna flip
over to the Daily wire plus side you can
continue consider joining us there if
you want to uh hear more about the
background of Zach's life for example
and to discover with us what motivated
him to pursue the path that he pursued
which is kind of what I do on the daily
word plus side
um you might want to consider giving
them some support because well if you
like this sort of discussion they're the
ones facilitating it and that's real
good of them thanks to the film crew
here in Toronto today and uh Zach for
making the trip up here that's very much
appreciated thank you and uh thank you
all very much for your time and
attention see you soon
[Music]
thank you